---
layout: post
title:  "Ansible 2.5 and OpenStack"
date:   2018-05-20 14:31:11
tags: [ansible, openstack]
---
I spent some time today figuring out how the new mechanism for inventory plugins
for [Ansible] 2.5 works, and also spent quite a bit of time scratching my head
at an error I encountered when executing a test playbook against [Rackspace
Public Cloud].

## Inventory Plugin for OpenStack
The inventory plugin system was introduced into Ansible 2.4. The old dynamic
inventory mechanism still works, so until now I've never tried to use the new
system. The documentation is a little confusing and I found the [inventory
samples] by [Alan Rominger] very useful to get me on the right track.

The minimal requirement to make the OpenStack inventory plugin work is to put
a file named ``openstack.yml`` or ``openstack.yaml`` in your inventory folder.

For example, I have the following in ``ansible.cfg``:

```INI
[defaults]
inventory = inventory
```

And the contents of ``inventory/openstack.yml`` is:

```yml
plugin: openstack
fail_on_errors: yes
```

This assumes that you already have a [clouds.yaml] file in your ~/.config
folder, and have the ``shade`` library installed into the same python
environment as Ansible.

That's it! Thanks to the default ``auto`` inventory plugin being enabled, it
will find the ``openstack.yml`` file and enable the OpenStack inventory plugin.

## Using the Ansible os_server module against Rackspace Public Cloud

When trying to use the os_server module against Rackspace Public Cloud I got
this error:

```Text
TASK [Create/delete OpenStack Instance] ************************************************************************************************************************
fatal: [localhost]: FAILED! => changed=false
  extra_data: null
  msg: 'Unavailable feature: security groups'
```

This is odd, because the same playbook works just fine in Ansible 2.3. I spent
quite a bit of time trying to hunt down what changed to precipitate this problem
but was unsuccessful. I did manage to find a way to make it work though - just
provide an empty list for the security_groups argument.

```yml
- name: Create/delete OpenStack Instance
  os_server:
    name: "setup-instance-test1"
    flavor: "general1-1"
    state: "present"
    cloud: "rackspace"
    region_name: "IAD"
    image: "Ubuntu 18.04 LTS (Bionic Beaver) (PVHVM)"
    key_name: superduper
    security_groups: []
    config_drive: yes
    meta:
      build_config: core
    wait: yes
    timeout: 900
```

The default value the module has is ``[ 'default' ]`` and the module therefore
tries to implement this when building the instance. However it seems that this
capability is not available for Rackspace Public Cloud, and it fails the task.

I hope that figuring this out will help someone else save some time.

[Alan Rominger]: https://github.com/AlanCoding
[Ansible]: https://www.ansible.com/
[clouds.yaml]: https://gist.github.com/odyssey4me/fd340be50301a8b7d6eca46f65866caa
[inventory samples]: https://github.com/AlanCoding/Ansible-inventory-file-examples/tree/master/plugins#using-openstack
[Rackspace Public Cloud]: https://www.rackspace.com/en-gb/cloud/public
